# Impressions, perspective drawing and 3D thinking

I've been thinking a lot about drawing lately. I've been sketching since I was a kid but I never progressed beyond just copying things from images or drawing what I see in front of me. But the ultimate thing in art for me is to be able to draw from your head while still making it 'believable'. I'm thinking of artists like Moebius, who were able to create fantastic worlds in their imagination, and bring it to life through their masterful technique. And for the longest time, I used to think that being able to create works like that was a skill far out of reach for mere mortals like me, until I read an art book on Impressionism and learned more about art fundamentals and perspective drawing. Slowly I was able to bring together all these different concepts in my head, to the point where I can now look at a piece of art and kind of figure where they were coming from to make something like that, atleast from a technical point of view.


The first realization I had was this - making believable art isn't the same thing as making realistic art. To be able to draw a believable tree, you don't need to know what each leaf looks like from every angle. You only need to draw an impression of a leaf. And the key word here is impression, because when you sit down to draw a leaf, your brain's idea of a leaf is different from your eyes actually percieve leaves. I read somewhere that our eyes can only focus on 2% of our entire visual field. Our brains take the raw masses of colors, shapes and textures we see in the periphery and associate that with the concepts it has learned over time. Without this kind of simplication and reduction of sensory information, our brains would probably be overloaded with stimulus. On a side note, this is what Aldous Huxley thought Mescaline/psychedlics do to the brain - they loosen this valve that brings that outside world into our brain and makes us experience more reality than we can handle. 

What all this means for art is that idea of drawing leaves changes from 'what do leaves look like in this particular view?' to 'how do i convince the viewer that these bunch of squiggles are really leaves?'. It's all a trick, an illusion. Squinting is a far better way to really see at the world and understand how to portray it, rather than going deep with a microscope to understand all the details.

Okay so now I understood how to draw things without knowing the details. All I need to do is create an impression of the object. But what about the surroundings of my object? How does it look in light and how do I actually place my object in a believable way? This is where perspective comes in. I really got into perspective drawing about 2 years ago, because I found the very basic idea behind it very trippy. Just as our brains fool us into thinking masses of textures as real objects, it also convinces you that the lines you see in 3D space are parallel when they are really not. For example, take the walls of the room we are in. Since our brain knows the room is a cuboid, when looking around, we take it for granted that the walls are parallel to each other. But what our eyes really see, if you focus on just the raw borders of the walls, are lines at an angle. Looking at different objects and where their border lines point, we can see that all of these lines converge to a point, which is the vanishing point. 

Understanding perspective takes a lot more work and practice beyond this basic fact of perception. But once I did that, I was able to understand depth and how to place objects in a 3D space. I could draw basic scenes and create the illusion of looking at a real landscape. 

But i was still not at my goal of drawing from my head. 


